Journal of Public D eliberation
Volume 6 |Issue 2 Article 4
9-20-2010
From T own-H alls to W ikis: Explor ing W ikipedia's
Implic ations for D eliberative D emocracy
Nathaniel J . Klemp
Pepperdine University, nathaniel.klemp@pe pperdine.edu
Andrew T . Forcehimes
Vanderbilt University, andrew.t.forcehime s@V anderbilt.Edu
Follow thi s and a dditional w orks at:https://w ww.pub licdeliberation.net/jpd
This Contributions is brought to you for f ree and ope n access by Public D eliberation. It has be en accepted for inclusion in J ournal of P ublic
Deliberation b y an author ized editor of P ublic D eliberation.Recomme nded Citation
Klemp, Nathaniel J. and F orcehime s, Andrew T. (2010) " From T own-H alls to W ikis: Exploring W ikipedia's Implications for
Deliberative Democr acy,"Journal of P ublic Deliberation: Vol. 6 : I ss. 2 , A rticle 4.
Available at:https://w ww.pub licdeliberation.net/jpd/v ol6/iss2/a rt4

From T own-H alls to W ikis: Explor ing W ikipedia's Implic ations for
Deliberative D emocracy
Abstract
This essay ex amine s the imp lications Wikipedia ho lds for the ories of de liberative de mocr acy. It argues
that while simi lar in s ome r espects, the mode of in teraction w ithin W ikipedia represents a d istinct ive
form of “ collaborative editing” that departs from m any of the qual ities traditionally as sociated with fa ce-
to-face de liberation. Thi s onl ine mode of in teraction o vercome s many of the pr oblems that distort face-
to-face de liberations. By mit igating pr oblems that arise in de liberative practice, such as “ group
polarization” and “ hidde n pr ofiles,” the w iki mode l oft en realizes the e pistemic a nd pr ocedural
aspirations of de liberative de mocr acy. The se virtues of the W ikipedia mode l should not , however, lead
to the simp le conclusion th at it ou ght to replace traditional fa ce-to-face de liberation. Instead, thi s essay
argues that the c ollaborative editing pr ocess found w ithin W ikipedia ou ght to be v iewed as a pr omi sing
supplement to traditional de liberation. The se two mode s of c omm unica tion ou ght to be v iewed in
Madisonian terms – as d istinct ive for ms of in teraction th at che ck a nd b alance the v ices of one a nothe r.
When comb ined, the w iki mode l promot es the v irtues of inclusion a nd a ccuracy at large scale s, while
the fa ce-to-face mode l exc els in c ond itions of local ism and pr omot es the v irtues of s olidarity and s ocial
capital.
Keywords
Deliberative Democr acy, Group Processes, Infor mation T echno logy, Wikipedia
Acknowledgements
We would l ike to ackno wledge the t wo anon ymous r eviewers who offe red a n umbe r of he lpful in sights
and c omme nts. We would al so like to th ank C aleb Clanton, J ane M ansbridge, and the e ditor of the
Journal of P ublic D eliberation, T ed Be cker, for their he lpful comme nts.
This contributions is available in J ournal of P ublic D eliberation:https://w ww.pub licdeliberation.net/jpd/v ol6/iss2/a rt4

 
In The Politics , Aristotle makes a provocative claim about the nature of collective 
intelligence.  He likens the combination of minds to a pot-luck dinner: “The many, of 
whom none is individually an excellent man, nevertheless can when joined together be 
better – not as individuals but all together – than those [who are best], just as dinners 
contributed [by many] can be better than those equipped from a single expenditure” 
(Aristotle 1984, 1281b1). When their virtues are combined, argues Aristotle, the many 
can surpass the intelligence of even the most gifted few.   
Throughout the last forty years, democratic theorists have pointed to deliberation 
as a democratic tool for realizing Aristotle’s vision.  Like Aristotle’s pot-luck, 
deliberation is ideally inclusive.  It ensures the legitimacy of political decision-making by 
welcoming all citizens to voice their perspectives.  Also like Aristotle’s vision, 
deliberation enhances collective understanding.  By enabling all citizens to contribute, it 
combines the unique perspectives and understandings of individuals to reach more 
informed collective decisions.    
In theory, the Internet’s power to unite individuals throughout the world would 
seem to produce the optimal conditions for realizing Aristotle’s ideal of collective 
intelligence.  Online communities allow a seemingly limitless number of individuals to 
interact and to combine their perspectives.  Yet on many accounts, the Internet often 
appears to diminish rather than enhance the possibility of achieving this ideal.  Cass 
Sunstein (2001), for instance, praises some aspects of interaction within the Internet but 
worries that it “is serving, for many, as a breeding ground for extremism, precisely 
because like-minded people are deliberating with one another, and often without hearing 
contrary views” (71).  
1Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

2  Since its creation in 2001, Wikipedia, the free Internet Encyclopedia, has 
managed to overcome many of these worries.  It is driven by the egalitarian idea that 
anyone with access to the Internet ought to be able to create, edit, and revise the site’s 
content.  Unlike newspapers, magazines, and TV broadcasts, in which content is created 
and edited by a handful of professionals, Wikipedia thrives on a more decentralized 
model.  Within the virtual space of Wikipedia, information is assembled and edited by 
thousands of people across the world – people who need not have any formal training or 
degrees and who have never even met.  Wikipedia also appears to produce positive 
epistemic outcomes.  It harnesses the vast power of the many to create an accurate and 
expansive open-source encyclopedia. 
In this essay, we examine the implications Wikipedia holds for deliberative 
democracy.  We argue that the mode of interaction within Wikipedia overcomes many of 
the problems that distort face-to-face deliberations and, at least partially, realizes the 
epistemic and procedural aspirations of deliberative democracy.   This does not, however, 
mean that the Wikipedia model ought to be viewed as a replacement for traditional face-
to-face deliberation.  Instead, we argue that the mode of interaction within Wikipedia 
may supplement face-to-face deliberation.  When combined, these two forms of 
interaction check one another: the Wikipedia model promotes inclusion and accuracy 
when used at a large scale, while the face-to-face model promotes solidarity and social 
capital and excels in conditions of localism. 
The essay divides into five primary parts.  The first outlines the evolution of 
Wikipedia.   The second outlines two of the primary aspirations of deliberative 
democracy: the procedural aspiration toward inclusion and the epistemic aspiration 
2Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

3 toward accuracy.  The third section examines the differences between ideal forms of face-
to-face deliberation and the form of collaborative editing found in Wikipedia.   The forth 
section juxtaposes the collaborative editing process of Wikipedia against the actual 
practice, as opposed to the theoretical ideal, of deliberation.   We argue that in turning 
from theory to practice two primary problems with deliberation emerge: the problems of 
group polarization and hidden profiles.   We will then argue that the vast size and relative 
anonymity of Wikipedia enable this mode of interaction to at least partially overcome 
these problems.  In the final section, we outline the limitations of the Wikipedia model 
and argue for a synthesis of such online and traditional face-to-face deliberations.  We 
conclude by sketching out a few concrete ways in which Wikipedia might supplement 
face-to-face deliberation.  
 
I. The Wikipedia Experiment 
 In early 2001, Jim Wales and Larry Sanger, founders of Wikipedia, had a wild 
idea: why not create an Internet encyclopedia that is written, edited, and revised by 
ordinary users?   Since then, the growth of this user-created encyclopedia has been 
astronomical: within one month, Wikipedia had more than 600 articles; within a year, it 
had 20,000 (Schiff 2006); and now Wikipedia has nearly 2.9 million articles in its 
English Language Edition alone, and has a total of more than 13 million articles in 260 
languages (Wikipedia 2009a). 
The technology driving this experiment is a simple software tool called a “wiki,” 
which enables multiple users to write and edit content.  The word “wiki” comes from the 
word “wikiwiki,” which is Hawaiian for “fast” or “speedy” (Sunstein 2006, 149). The 
3Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

4 pioneer of the wiki concept was Ward Cunningham, who developed the first wiki to 
enable large numbers of users to edit and add new content.  Cunningham was perhaps the 
first to see the democratic possibilities of this new technology: “Wiki is inherently 
democratic,” he declared, “every user has exactly the same capabilities as any other user” 
(Sunstein 2006, 148). 
Using this tool, Wikipedia has created a platform on which “people of all ages 
and cultural and social backgrounds can write Wikipedia articles.  Most of the articles 
can be edited by anyone with access to the Internet, simply by clicking the edit this page 
link” (Wikipedia 2009a). For self-described “Wikipedians,” this process of collaborative 
content creation is understood through the metaphor of a “socially Darwinian 
evolutionary process” (Wikipedia 2006a).  Like the process of evolution, there are two 
primary mechanisms driving Wikipedia’s rapid expansion: variation and selective 
retention.  With upwards of nine million registered contributors, variations in content 
arise almost continuously (Wikipedia 2009a).  Yet as in the evolutionary model, not all of 
these variations are retained.  New additions and modifications are only retained if 
deemed useful by fellow users. The use of “revision control” expedites the process of 
correcting mistakes and vandalism by enabling users to “revert” an article to past 
versions, and track the edits of other users (Wikipedia 2009b). This means that 
outrageous and inaccurate variations on content are quickly replaced until new and more 
accurate ones arise. 
The open-source structure of Wikipedia also means that it costs next to nothing to 
maintain.  Despite its millions of entries, the site is run by the Wikimedia Foundation, a 
nonprofit organization consisting of less than twenty employees, and operating on an 
4Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

5 annual budget of only $3,500,000 (Wikipedia 2008).  The reason for such low overhead 
costs:  the producers and editors of content are the users themselves and, as a result, they 
need not be hired, paid, or managed.   
 
II. Deliberative Democracy 
 While Wikipedia has transformed the world of encyclopedias, this essay seeks to 
understand the form of interaction within it as a potential supplement to traditional forms 
of democratic deliberation.1  To do this, we will examine whether the mode of interaction 
within Wikipedia realizes two of the traditional ideals of deliberation:  (1) the procedural 
aspiration toward inclusion and (2) the epistemic aspiration toward accuracy or truth-
tracking.  Of course, there are many other ideals and aspirations that emerge in the 
literature on deliberation.  Yet we argue that the ends of inclusion and accuracy play a 
prominent role both in traditional and more recent theories of deliberation. 
Traditional accounts of deliberative democracy argue that when citizens disagree 
about moral and political issues, as they inevitably will, such disagreements ought to be 
dealt with through the exchange of reasons.  Gutmann and Thompson (2004) call this the 
“reason-giving requirement.”  It is the idea that “in a democracy, leaders should…give 
reasons for their decisions, and respond to the reasons that citizens give in return” (3).   
As we will see, such “reason-giving requirements” are justified on the grounds that they 
promote procedural fairness and truth-tracking in political decision making.2  
                                                 
1 We recognize Wikipedia’s claim that, “[it] is not a democracy” (Wikipedia 2009f). Yet we are not 
examining whether it is a democracy per se , but rather if it can facilitate deliberative practices within a 
democracy.   
2 For a closer examination of the distinctions between justifications based on fairness and truth-tracking see 
Estlund 2008, 127. 
5Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

6 The proceduralist justification argues that decisions are legitimate if they are the 
result of a fair procedure where all parties can participate in contestation and debate.  Put 
differently, legitimacy arises when deliberations take into account the views of all 
citizens, not just those of the numerical majority (Rawls 1996, 213; cf. Cohen 1997, 72; 
Estlund 1997, 177). As Bernard Manin explains,  
Because it [the decision] comes at the close of a deliberative process in which everyone 
was able to take part, choose among several solutions, and remain free to approve or 
refuse the conclusions developed from the argument, the result carries legitimacy.   The 
decision results from a process in which the minority point of view was also taken into 
consideration (Manin 1987, 359). 
 
On such proceduralist justifications, deliberation confers legitimacy by ensuring that even 
the losers in the political process have their views “taken into consideration.” In short, the 
proceduralist position holds that political legitimacy hinges on fairness and inclusion – on 
granting all citizens the capacity to voice their views.    
The epistemic position, on the other hand, holds that political legitimacy arises 
from the propensity of deliberations to produce accurate decisions.  Cheryl Misak 
captures the essence of this view by declaring, “Deliberative democracy in political 
philosophy is the right view, because deliberative democracy in epistemology is the right 
view” (Misak 2004, 15).  Deliberation is necessary on this view because in the absence of 
robust debate and critical scrutiny, citizens and lawmakers cannot know whether their 
decisions are indeed based on accurate beliefs (Misak 2008, 95-96 cf. Talisse 2007, 389). 
Thus the epistemic view presumes that when making political decisions, deliberation is 
the best (if not the only) way to ensure that the decision is “truth-tracking” (Nino 1996, 
107 cf. Estlund 2008, 8; Talisse 2004, 27).  So on the epistemic view, the exchange of 
reasons, arguments, and evidence that occurs in deliberation confers legitimacy on the 
political process not primarily because it is fair or inclusive but because it tends to 
6Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

7 produce accurate decisions. We should note that the proceduralist position and the 
epistemic position are by no means incompatible.  Many theorists who value inclusion 
also value accuracy.  Likewise, many who hold the epistemic position also value the 
proceduralist emphasis on inclusion. 
A detailed discussion of these two ideals is beyond the scope of this essay.   Our 
goal in outlining these two positions has been to show that both ideals offer justifications 
for deliberation as a tool for establishing legitimate political authority.  We leave open 
the question of which of these two accounts offers the most compelling justification for 
deliberation.  Instead, we use these two justificatory accounts as an analytic baseline for 
examining Wikipedia’s potential as a supplement to deliberation.3 We use the 
proceduralist position to examine whether Wikipedia embodies a procedurally fair 
process of information exchange.   We use the epistemic position to examine whether 
Wikipedia enhances collective understanding.  
 
III. Is Wikipedia Deliberative? 
 Before juxtaposing Wikipedia against these two deliberative ideals, we begin by 
asking: are members of Wikipedia engaged in deliberation or some other form of 
interaction?  At the outset, the form of interaction within Wikipedia appears to depart 
from traditional deliberation.  The information exchanges within Wikipedia result in a 
collaboratively authored encyclopedia.  Ideal deliberation, by contrast, aims primarily at 
facilitating democratic decision-making and legitimating the use of coercive state power.   
                                                 
3 We should emphasize that this distinction is a generalization  and should not be taken as anything beyond 
an analytic tool. For we fully recognize that most contemporary deliberative democrats, such as Habermas 
(1990; 1996) and Estlund (2008), offer hybrid version of deliberative democracy that equally emphasize 
both the procedural and epistemic value of deliberation.   
7Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

8 In spite of these general differences, many existing accounts argue that Wikipedia is, at 
least in part, an exercise in deliberation.   Sunstein, for example, claims that though wikis 
are primarily “mechanisms for aggregating information” (Sunstein 2006, 148), Wikipedia 
“is in part a deliberative forum, with reason-giving by those who disagree and with 
deliberative ‘places’ to accompany disagreement” (152).   
We agree with Sunstein’s characterization of Wikipedia as a partially deliberative 
environment.  However, we argue that the primary form of interaction is not deliberation 
but rather what we call collaborative editing.  To be sure, this process shares two key 
qualities of the deliberative ideal.  First, it is guided by a similar orientation toward the 
common interest.  Second, it appeals to the norm of consensus as its ideal decision rule.  
Yet Wikipedia departs from two other primary features of ideal deliberation.  First, it 
represents a shift from face-to-face to more anonymous forms of online interaction.  
Second, it substitutes an egalitarian form of collaborative editing for the deliberative 
practice of reason-giving as its primary mechanism of information exchange.   
 
 
Distinguishing Deliberation From Collaborative Editing 
 
 Ideal Deliberation Wikipedia 
Aspiration Common Interest Common Interest 
Decision Rule Consensus Consensus 
Level of Intimacy Face-to-Face Relative Anonymity   
Interactive Mechanism Reason Giving Collaborative Editing * 
 
 
Figure 1:  Adapted from Jane Mansbridge’s (1983) account of unitary and adversary 
democracy, this figure illuminates the primary features of ideal deliberation and 
Wikipedia’s collaborative editing.  We borrow three of her criterion (assumption, 
decision rule, and level of intimacy) and add one of our own (interactive mechanism).  
8Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

9 These four categories serve as an analytic baseline for distinguishing ideal deliberation 
from the process of collaborative editing found in Wikipedia.   *Collaborative editing is 
the primary form of interaction in Wikipedia, but, as Sunstein (2006, 152) notes, forums 
of deliberative reason-giving also exist. 
 
 Consider first the similarities between ideal deliberation and Wikipedia’s 
collaborative editing.   Like most deliberative ideals (Cohen 2002; Habermas 1997; 
Mansbridge 1983; Pettit 2000; Gutmann & Thompson 1996), contributors to Wikipedia 
aspire toward the common interest.  This aspiration is perhaps most evident in the 
foundational principle guiding the editing process: “neutral point of view” (NPOV).   
This principle encourages participants to avoid biased or self-serving contributions and to 
instead present information from a neutral point of view.  According to this principle: 
“where there have been conflicting views, these should be presented fairly” (Wikipedia, 
2006).4  Implicit within this call for neutrality is an aspiration toward creating content 
that serves the common interests of all readers.  Entries on controversial political issues, 
for instance, should not privilege the interests of Democrats or Republicans.  Rather, they 
should present information neutrally, in ways that represent all relevant perspectives. 
In comparing ideals of deliberation with Wikipedia, perhaps the most striking 
similarity arises from their shared emphasis on consensus.  Like the deliberative ideals of 
Cohen (2002) and Habermas (1979), decisions concerning the rules, policies, and content 
of Wikipedia arise out of a process of “reasonable-consensus building.”  In determining 
policies and mediating disputes, the Wikipedia community aspires toward solutions that 
appeal to all users.  Once a consensus is reached, these moments of unanimous agreement 
are then translated into basic guidelines and principles.  “If we find that a particular 
                                                 
4 Two other guidelines supplement the NPOV rule.  The first is “verifiability,” which requires that other 
users be able to check the sources used to create new content.  The second is “no original research,” which 
mandates that entries cannot contain unpublished arguments, ideas, data, or theories.  In addition to these 
principles, Wikipedia encourages users to adhere to the norms of good faith and civility and to refrain from 
personal attacks on other editors (Wikipedia 2006a).  
9Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

10 consensus happens often,” Wikipedia explains, “we write it down as a guideline, to save 
people from having to discuss the same principles over and over” (Wikipedia 2006b). 
This commitment to consensus arises out of a concern for the potentially 
tyrannical effects of majoritarian decision rules.  As their rules page explains, “At times, 
a group of editors may be able to, through persistence, numbers, and organization, 
overwhelm well-meaning editors and generate what appears to be support for a version of 
the article that is actually inaccurate, libelous, or not neutral, e.g. giving undue weight to 
a specific point of view.  This is not a consensus” (Wikipedia 2006b). The worry here is 
that articles based upon the perspective of the numerical majority, as opposed to the 
perspective of the whole or of a supermajority, will not result in unbiased or neutral 
material.5   
Although Wikipedia shares this emphasis on the common interest and consensus, 
it departs from two key aspects of the deliberative tradition.  First, the online interactions 
in Wikipedia represent a shift from face-to-face to partially anonymous interaction.  In 
Mansbridge’s deliberative account of “unitary democracy” and in many other ideal 
accounts of deliberation, face-to-face relations play a vital role.  Such relations cultivate 
civic friendship and shared understanding.  As Mansbridge puts it, “The face-to-face 
interaction of friends helps to create and to maintain their common interests…They come 
to respect and to know one another by piecing together, over time, informal cues derived 
from their intimate contact” (Mansbridge 1983, 10).  While Mansbridge is explicit in her 
                                                 
5 It should be noted, however, that Wikipedia’s rejection of pure majoritarianism is only partial.  While 
consensus is the ideal, Wikipedia users admit that unanimity may not always be possible.  In certain 
circumstances, they allow for super-majoritarian procedures.  When consensus proves impossible, for 
instance, decisions must made on the basis of a super-majority, consisting of anywhere from 60% to 80% 
of participants (Wikipedia 2006).  
 
10Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

11 emphasis on face-to-face relations, most other deliberative theories rest on an implicit 
presumption of face-to-face contact.   Public political forums, informal conversations, 
and town hall meetings – all of these traditional deliberative settings enable citizens to 
face one another when exchanging reasons and information. 
Wikipedia departs from such traditional deliberative settings.  Its users go by 
names like “Scray,” “Ferrylodge,” “AxelBoldt,” “Almondwine,” or “MamaGeek.”  
Although users may become familiar with the online personas of others, they are likely 
never to meet face-to-face, to see one another, or to ever know the real names of fellow 
users.   As a result, this online space creates an interactive world based not on face-to-
face intimacy but on relative  anonymity.  The anonymity of Wikipedia users is relative 
for two reasons.  First, editors’ anonymity is not impenetrable, as one Wikipedia page 
cautions “your mask can fall off” (Wikipedia 2009g).  For example, the “WikiScanner”—
a tool used to trace anonymous edits to organizations or individuals IP addresses—was 
used to identify the, now famous edits made by Brian Chase (whose story we will return 
to later) (Wikipedia 2009h). However, even tracing an IP address is becoming 
increasingly difficult.  Programs now enable “cloud browsing,” allowing individuals to 
connect to a remote computer and browse with an altered IP address. Also, browser plug-
ins like “FoxyProxy” or “TOR” mask IP addresses making it impossible to track users.  
Thus, it is possible to be almost completely anonymous on Wikipedia but it is largely 
contingent upon the precautions taken by the user.  
Second, while most frequent users establish a consistent pseudonym, which 
enables other users to identify their contributions, important elements of their identity in 
real space (race, attractiveness, age, and public speaking ability) remain hidden.  
11Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

12 Wikipedia encourages editing with a pseudonym, because “logging in under a 
pseudonym lets you build trust and respect through a history of good edits. It is also 
easier to communicate and collaborate with an editor if we know who you are (at least, 
who you are on Wikipedia)” (Wikipedia 2010a). Yet, even when using a consistent 
pseudonym, a degree of anonymity still exists.   After all, the user has far more control 
over how his or her identity appears in the online space of Wikipedia than in real space.  
As Smith and Kollock (1999) observe, in such virtual communities, inhabitants are 
“diffuse, free from the body’s unifying anchor.  One can have, some claim, as many 
electronic personae as one has time and energy to create” (29).  By enabling users to 
construct their own identity, the traditional markers of status that distort deliberation in 
real space (see section four) become largely irrelevant.  Even if an individual were to 
attempt to gain status through revealing his or her race, gender, or educational 
credentials, such attempts are likely to be viewed by other users with suspicion.   The fact 
that each user could invent a misleading or exaggerated online identity means that such 
markers of status in real-space lose much of their power.  
While the normal markers of status in real-space are largely irrelevant, those with 
a track record of positive contributions to the encyclopedia can establish status and 
prestige within the Wikipedia community.  For example, the process of becoming a 
Wikipedia administrator requires making enough “good” edits (typically a few thousand) 
to gain 70-85 percent approval when the user makes a Request for Adminship (Dee 
2007).  These hierarchies within Wikipedia create inequalities in status.  Yet unlike the 
diminishing effects of status in real space, we have found no evidence to suggest that 
such status differences undermine the inclusiveness or epistemic accuracy of the 
12Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

13 collaborative editing process.   In fact, it seems as though this online status system 
enhances the accuracy of contributions.  The status of Wikipedians, after all, is 
determined not by arbitrary factors like age, race, or gender but by the accuracy of the 
editor’s contributions.  So while status inequalities exist, these differences would appear 
to enhance the epistemic accuracy of the editing process. 
The second key difference between traditional deliberation and Wikipedia arises 
from the mechanism of interaction.  While deliberation occurs through reason-giving, 
interaction within Wikipedia occurs through collaborative editing.   As we have seen, for 
Gutmann and Thompson (2004) the “reason-giving requirement,” which stipulates “the 
need to justify decisions made by citizens and their representatives” (3), is fundamental to 
deliberative democracy.   
In contrast to reason-giving, interactions within Wikipedia are based on a process 
of collaborative editing.  Online editors work collaboratively to add relevant information, 
eliminate bias, and fine-tune spelling and grammar.  This is not a conversational 
exchange where parties offer arguments and reasons about a future decision.  Rather, 
each party takes this decision making process into his or her own hands, changing the 
content of Wikipedia’s entries with minimal consultation or deliberation.  This points to a 
crucial distinction.  In ideal deliberation, collective outcomes arise through a prior 
process of reason-giving that, at least ideally, results in a decision made through 
consensus.  In Wikipedia, collective outcomes arise from a kind of “editorial 
equilibrium” – a process where individuals implement revisions at their own discretion 
but where only those changes that enhance the accuracy or readability of the entry will 
survive the scrutiny of fellow editors.  
13Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

14 While collaborative editing plays a primary role in Wikipedia, it should be noted 
that more deliberative forms of reason-giving also exist.  In creating entries, editors use a 
separate page (the “Talk Page”) as well as I.R.C. channels to discuss possible changes in 
content.  Consider, for instance, the longstanding debate among editors on the “abortion” 
page concerning whether to display images of aborted fetuses.  On one side, editors argue 
that pictures ought to be displayed.  In one such user’s words, “Why aren’t there any 
pictures of the aborted babies here? It really seems that Wikipedia is whitewashing this 
issue. In the very least we should acknowledge what abortion is and what it does to an 
unborn child” (Wikipedia 2006c). Critics reply that displaying such photos violates 
Wikipedia’s foundational principle of No Point of View and is inconsistent with the 
structure of many of Wikipedia’s other entries.  As one user insisted: “[P]uting a picture 
in is unneeded. If you are saying that there should be a picture to give a better 
understanding of the topic then surely the mastectomy page should have a picture of a 
removed breast or the area where the breast used to be to increase the understanding of 
the procedure and what it entails” (Wikipedia 2006c).   Such reason-giving often yields 
creative solutions.  In response to this exchange, another user offered a possible 
compromise: “I’m not sure if this has ever been suggested, but we could put a link at the 
end in the external link section to some pictures” (Wikipedia 2006c). 
 That Wikipedia users also appeal to reason-giving does not mean that this is a 
fully deliberative process.  As we have seen the primary form of interaction lies not on 
the “Talk” pages or I.R.C. channels but in the process of content creation itself.  This 
editorial process is less an exchange of reasons and more an attempt to achieve an 
14Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

15 editorial equilibrium through the unstructured and often chaotic edits and revisions of a 
wide array of users.  
 
IV. Juxtaposing Practical Deliberation and Collaborative Editing  
The previous section sought to outline the structural differences between the 
Wikipedia model and ideal forms of face-to-face deliberation.  While important, this 
essay seeks to extend this comparison beyond the realm of ideal theory to the actual 
practice of collaborative editing and deliberation.  In evaluating the potential uses of the 
Wikipedia model as a supplement to deliberation, it is not enough to compare this model 
to theoretical ideals of deliberation.  We must also compare it against deliberative 
practice.  When, after all, we turn from deliberation in theory to deliberation in practice, a 
number of problems emerge that stand in the way of realizing the procedural and 
epistemic aspirations of deliberative democracy.  As a result of status inequalities, group 
polarization, and other empirical problems, the actual practice of deliberation often 
diminishes rather than enhances these values (Mendelberg 2002). 
In what follows, we outline two of the primary shortcomings of face-to-face 
deliberation:  the problem of group polarization and hidden profiles.   We also examine 
the ways in which the collaborative editing process of Wikipedia overcomes these 
empirical shortcomings.   Again, our aim is not to call for an end to face-to-face 
deliberation but to explore the potential of alternative spaces such as Wikipedia to 
supplement and improve existing practices of deliberation.  
 
1. The Problem of Group Polarization 
15Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

16 This first problem arises in the deliberations of homogenous groups, where 
members share the same values, beliefs, or preferences.  In such contexts, deliberation 
tends to erode the procedural and epistemic quality of collective understanding.  Consider 
what occurred when sixty citizens in Colorado were broken up into ten deliberative 
groups (Sunstein 2006).  In this experiment, participants were divided into “red state 
groups,” consisting of conservatives from Colorado Springs, and “blue state groups,” 
consisting of liberals from Boulder.  Members of these groups were asked to state their 
opinions on questions about same-sex marriage, affirmative action, and global warming 
before and after fifteen minutes of deliberation within their groups.   
What were the effects of deliberation?  As Sunstein (2006) explains, “In almost 
every group, members ended up with more extreme positions after they spoke with one 
another.  Discussion made civil unions more popular among liberals; discussion made 
civil unions less popular among conservatives” (Sunstein 2006, 45-46).  This study along 
with countless others shows that deliberation within like-minded groups tends to have 
polarizing effects (Brown 2000; Sunstein 2000; Sunstein 2001; Sunstein 2002).    
These findings indicate that the homogenous deliberations undermine both the 
procedural and epistemic aspirations of deliberative democracy.  On the one hand, 
conditions of group polarization undermine the procedural aspiration toward an inclusive 
public dialogue.  Rather than cultivating the values of fairness, tolerance, and equality, 
such homogenous groups often become “breeding grounds for unjustified extremism, 
even fanaticism” (Sunstein 2002, 178).  This results in two interrelated procedural 
worries.  First, group polarization diminishes inclusion by cultivating attitudes of 
extremism and intolerance – attitudes that promote monolithic group identities and the 
16Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

17 exclusion of those with diverse perspectives.  Second, such conditions cultivate a 
fragmented public deliberative forum.  Rather than creating an inclusive conversation 
between citizens from all backgrounds, deliberation tends to occur within insulated 
enclave spaces that erode the diversity and openness of the broader public political 
forum.  
In addition to causing procedural problems, group polarization also threatens the 
epistemic aspirations of deliberative democracy.  Along with pushing groups toward 
more extreme positions, such deliberations also tend to ossify, rather than correct, 
epistemic errors and biases. Overly homogeneous deliberations tend to move group 
members toward ever more extreme positions in the direction of their pre-deliberative 
beliefs and preferences (Sunstein 2002, 178).  This means that in cases where like-
minded individuals hold false beliefs prior to deliberation, the polarizing effects of 
homogeneous group deliberation will push them further toward problematic 
informational outcomes (Sunstein 2006, 96).  
While the real-world deliberations of activists, community members, and 
religious groups often descend into group polarization, the vast size of the collaborative 
community within Wikipedia enables it to evade this worry.  Unlike most face-to-face 
deliberations, which become unwieldy when groups grow beyond ten or twenty people, 
Wikipedia faces no limitations on the size of its interactive body.  On popular entries, 
hundreds or even thousands of people regularly participate in the creation of new content.   
This vast size of the editorial community has two primary effects.  First, 
Wikipedia’s size creates a more inclusive conversation than smaller homogenous groups 
of like-minded citizens.  It cultivates interactions that welcome all individuals and 
17Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

18 mitigate the kinds of extremism and social fragmentation that emerge from homogenous 
deliberation.   One way to explain these moderating effects of Wikipedia’s more inclusive 
conversation is through Madison’s reflections on size in the Federalist Papers .  As he 
reminds us, collective decision-making within small groups and communities often 
generates dangerous results.  In Federalist 10, for instance, he declares : 
The smaller the society, the fewer the distinct parties and interests, the more frequently 
will a majority be found of the same party; and the smaller the number of individuals 
composing a majority, and the smaller the compass within which they are placed, the 
more easily will they concert and execute their plans of oppression (Madison 1987, 127). 
 
Madison thus argues that in creating government institutions, small homogenous groups 
ought to be avoided.  Instead, he argues that we ought to “extend the sphere” of the 
republic.  As the size of the republic increases, after all, the number of parties and 
interests also increases, which in turn makes it far more difficult for a single faction to 
attain majority power and invade the rights of other citizens (Madison 1987, 127-128).
 Wikipedia stands as a testament to Madison’s reflections on size.  While 
partiality, extremism, and conflict exist within its process of collaborative editing, the 
sheer size of the Wikipedia community has important moderating effects.  With millions 
of registered contributors from all parts of the world and all possible political, cultural, 
and religious persuasions, the size and diversity of Wikipedia serves as a structural check 
against extreme and inaccurate points of view. 6   
In the context of Wikipedia, fanatics, vandals, and self-promoters have almost no 
chance of mobilizing a majority faction devoted to the promotion of their point of view.  
Their efforts to distort Wikipedia’s content are often neutralized by the vast array of well-
                                                 
6 This structural check is by no means perfect. Wikipedia’s users clearly favor certain demographics. 
According to a self-report by Wikipedia, “80 percent [of editors] are male, more than 65 percent single, 
more than 85 percent without children, around 70 percent under the age of 30” (Cohen 2009).   
18Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

19 intentioned editors, who quickly “revert” their destructive contributions.   As founder Jim 
Wales puts it, “one of the things that we do is that we have a very strong neutrality policy 
that actually works very well. It turns out most people are quite reasonable, even people 
who come from interest groups. They really understand that you can’t put in a one-sided 
rant because it won’t survive very long in Wikipedia” (NPR interview).7 
On one reading of this quote, Wales seems to argue that the primary barrier to 
intolerance and extremism within Wikipedia is the cultural norm of neutrality, not the 
size of the deliberative community.   He asserts that it is the guiding principle of “neutral 
point of view” (NPOV) that promotes an ethos of reasonableness even among those with 
a clear ideological bias.  We agree that neutrality plays an important role, but we argue 
that this norm alone cannot ensure moderation.   Although most Wikipedians adhere to 
this norm, there have always been a deviant few who undermine the encyclopedia’s 
neutrality by posting inappropriate or biased content.   It is in checking these deviant few 
that size plays an essential role.   In fact, Wales references the moderating effects of size 
when he says, “you can’t put in a one-sided rant because it won’t survive very long in 
Wikipedia.” The speed with which such “one-sided rants” disappear requires more than 
the mere norm of neutrality.  It also requires the thousands of Wikipedia users who comb 
through its pages eliminating errors and bias. 
In addition to these procedural benefits, the vast size of online interactions within 
Wikipedia appears to overcome many of the epistemic problems that emerge in 
homogeneous groups.  By increasing the size and diversity of participants, Wikipedia’s 
process of collaborative editing increases the amount of information incorporated into the 
                                                 
7 In addition, self-serving edits often backfires, as it did with the Church of Scientology when the 
Wikipedia Arbitration Committee publicly reprimanded and banned the IP addresses of the Church 
(MacMillan 2009). 
19Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

20 process of content creation.   The vast size of Wikipedia coupled with the diversity of its 
contributors introduces new facts, theories, and opinions.  Rather than pushing groups 
toward factually incorrect outcomes, it mitigates error and bias, channeling interactions 
toward more accurate outcomes. 
While critics argue that Wikipedia is riddled with errors and misinformation, a 
recent side-by-side comparison of the encyclopedia against Encyclopedia Britannica 
shows that many of its entries have a similar number of errors.  To test Wikipedia’s 
accuracy, Nature  sent 42 science entries from both encyclopedias out for peer review by 
experts in the field.  Reviewers were told to count the number of errors in each entry and 
were not told which entries corresponded to which encyclopedia.    
The results showed that the two encyclopedias had virtually the same level of 
accuracy.  Out of the 42 entries, the reviewers found eight serious errors: four in 
Wikipedia and four in the Encyclopedia Britannica.  The reviewers also pointed out 162 
minor errors in Wikipedia and 123 minor errors in the Encyclopedia Britannica (Nature 
2005).  While more research is needed to determine whether Wikipedia’s accuracy 
extends beyond science articles, these preliminary results point toward an unexpected 
outcome.  They show that despite the chaotic nature of content creation on Wikipedia, 
where content emerges from a vast array of ordinary users rather than elites, its accuracy 
is, at the very least, in the same league as that of Britannica.  The point here is not to say 
that Wikipedia is superior to or more accurate than Britannica.  It is to say that these 
preliminary findings appear to support the more modest conclusion that Wikipedia’s 
collaborative editing process evades the epistemic dangers of group polarization – that it 
results in collaborative outcomes that appear to enhance collective understanding.   
20Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

21 To be sure, there are still serious concerns about the quality of information on 
Wikipedia.  The case most often cited to illuminate Wikipedia’s epistemic deficiencies 
occurred in the spring of 2005.   As a prank, Brian Chase fabricated an entry on John 
Seigenthaler, a well-known journalist who served briefly as an assistant to Robert 
Kennedy.  Chase’s Wikipedia entry falsely claimed that Seigenthaler lived in Russia for 
much of his life and that he was thought to have played an important role in the 
assassinations of both Robert and John F. Kennedy.  Despite the obvious falsity of these 
claims, Chase’s entry went unnoticed and uncorrected for 132 days (Economist 2006). 
Incidents such as these illustrate that Wikipedia’s radical egalitarianism is both its 
greatest strength and its greatest weakness – that this deliberative platform is susceptible 
to vandalism and malicious attempts to post false information.  Despite such occasional 
acts of vandalism, Wikipedia has come remarkably close to realizing the epistemic 
aspirations of deliberative democrats.  In Aristotle’s language, Wikipedia has tapped into 
the intelligence of the many to produce results that outperform the excellent few.  
 
2. The Problem of Hidden Profiles 
The potential for distortion in the real-world practice of deliberation is not unique 
to homogeneous groups.  Even within heterogeneous groups, a number of factors can 
erode both the epistemic and procedural quality of deliberation.  One problem arises from 
what are called “hidden profiles” (Hastie 1993; Stasser & Titus 1985; Stasser & Titus 
2003).  Hidden profiles occur when accurate information exists within the group, but 
cannot be obtained.   
21Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

Such hidden profiles result 
open information exchange .  One problem is that, as Tocqueville might remind us, 
majorities can have tyrannical effects on the minority within the group, silencing ideas 
and information that fall outside the scope of majority opinion
silencing effect occurs because those in the minority have significant incentives to stay 
quiet : opposing the majority places their reputation in jeopardy; supporting it does not.
Sunstein, following the “Asch Conformity Experiment” 
point empirically. Asch’s experiment 
nine college students were asked to view a 
lines in Exhibit 2 that matched the line in Exhibit 1 (Asch 1
 
 
 
 
All the participant s in the group except one were “confederates
announce their answers out loud (Sunstein 2003, 18). In the control group
was no pressure to conform, the non
(Sunstein 2003, 18). However, when the confederates
incorrect answers, the non- confederate
22 Such hidden profiles result from several primary empirical barriers to free an
.  One problem is that, as Tocqueville might remind us, 
majorities can have tyrannical effects on the minority within the group, silencing ideas 
and information that fall outside the scope of majority opinion  (Tocqueville 2004)
silencing effect occurs because those in the minority have significant incentives to stay 
: opposing the majority places their reputation in jeopardy; supporting it does not.
the “Asch Conformity Experiment” (1955), confirms Tocqueville’s 
Asch’s experiment was set up in the following way: g roups of seven to 
nine college students were asked to view a series of charts (see below) and to 
in Exhibit 2 that matched the line in Exhibit 1 (Asch 1 955, 32).       
s in the group except one were “confederates ” and all were told to 
announce their answers out loud (Sunstein 2003, 18). In the control group s, where there 
the non-confederates erred less t han 1% of the time 
However, when the confederates  began unanimously giving
confederate s followed suit.  In fact, 36.8% of the nonto free an d 
.  One problem is that, as Tocqueville might remind us, 
majorities can have tyrannical effects on the minority within the group, silencing ideas 
(Tocqueville 2004) .  This 
silencing effect occurs because those in the minority have significant incentives to stay 
: opposing the majority places their reputation in jeopardy; supporting it does not.  
Tocqueville’s 
roups of seven to 
to identify the 
 
were told to 
, where there 
han 1% of the time 
began unanimously giving  
the non -
22Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

23 confederates gave the same incorrect answer as the confederates, and in the set of 12 
questions, 70% answered at least one question wrong (Sunstein 2003, 19). In addition to 
answering incorrectly more frequently, the non-confederates experienced measureable 
levels of anxiety and a general reluctance to answer. Therefore, agreeing with 
Tocqueville, Sunstein states that social pressure causes individuals to “follow others and 
silence themselves, without disclosing knowledge from which others would benefit” 
(Sunstein 2003, 6). 
Information may also be concealed because low status members, who may have 
relevant information, often defer to high status members (Mansbridge 1983; Sanders 
1997; Sunstein 2006).  When confronted with the assertions of confident high status 
members, in other words, minorities, women, and others with lower social status will 
often accept, rather than actively challenge, these assertions.  In Jane Mansbridge’s study 
of town meetings in Selby, for instance, she finds that “face-to-face democracy” 
generates both feelings of friendship and solidarity and also conditions that silence those 
with lower social status: 
In this town meeting, as in many face-to-face democracies, the fears of making a fool of 
oneself, of losing control, of criticism, and of making enemies all contribute to the 
tension that arises in the settlement of disputes…To preserve the atmosphere of 
agreement, the more powerful participants are likely to withhold information and to exert 
subtle pressures that often work ultimately to the disadvantage of the least powerful 
(Mansbridge 1983, 71). 
 
In the actual practice of deliberation, these social pressures construct a powerful set of 
implicit social barriers that diminish the pool of available information and arguments. 
The emergence of such hidden profiles in the practice of deliberation challenges 
both the procedural aspiration toward inclusion and the epistemic aspiration toward 
accuracy.  From the procedural perspective, such group dynamics prevent a fully 
23Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

24 inclusive process of information exchange.  When status inequalities, majority tyranny, 
and forms of hidden profiles silence some participants, such deliberations fall short of full 
inclusion.  Rather than including all participants, they privilege the perspectives of the 
majority or those with higher social status.  From the epistemic perspective, such hidden 
profiles create problematic informational conditions that erode the accuracy of 
conversation.  By silencing those who hold potentially valuable information, errors in 
collective understanding may often go unchecked.  
 As with the problem of group polarization, Wikipedia’s unique structure offers an 
important corrective to the problem of hidden profiles.  It has managed to evade much of 
the social pressure that arises from status inequalities and majority tyranny by creating a 
relatively anonymous structure of social interaction.  In traditional deliberation, social 
norms and reputational pressures distort both the inclusiveness and accuracy of the 
process.  As Sunstein (2006) explains, “group members impose sanctions on perceived 
deviants, and would-be deviants anticipate the sanctions in advance” (78).  Knowing that 
they might be ridiculed or ostracized, group members who sit outside the majority will 
often remain silent – a result that diminishes the epistemic benefits of deliberation.    
 In contrast to face-to-face deliberations, the sense of relative anonymity within 
virtual communities such as Wikipedia’s enables parties to evade many of these social 
pressures.  For those who lack rhetorical eloquence, dread public speaking, or are 
intimidated by high status individuals, Wikipedia’s virtual community offers a much 
safer space for collaborative content creation.  As mentioned earlier, the ability of users 
to manufacture and customize their online identity causes traditional markers of status to 
become less relevant.  In the world of Wikipedia, it does not matter whether you have an 
24Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

25 advanced degree, whether you can think quickly on your feet, whether you are attractive, 
or whether you express your ideas with eloquence: what matters is whether you can 
contribute accurate information. As Wikipedia’s founder Jim Wales declares: “To me, the 
key thing is getting it right.  I don’t care if they’re a high-school kid or a Harvard 
professor” (Schriff 2006). 
This is not to say that social pressures are absent entirely from Wikipedia.  Like 
any community, Wikipedia does impose some sanctions on deviants who stray from its 
fundamental norms of civility and No Point of View.  For instance, vandals and those 
caught engaging in “revert wars” will have their editing privileges suspended for the day 
or, in more extreme cases, be banned from the community for life.  The power of such 
social pressures within online space, however, pales in comparison to the kinds of social 
pressures that exist in real-world deliberative contexts.   Like almost any form of 
interaction in cyberspace, the relative anonymity of Wikipedia decreases the constraining 
effects of social norms.  It creates a space within which participants can express novel 
facts and opinions with greater ease, which in turn appears to mitigate the powerful social 
pressures that distort face-to-face deliberation. 
This structure of relative anonymity enables Wikipedia to, at least partially, 
promote both procedural fairness and positive epistemic outcomes.  It promotes 
procedural inclusion in two primary ways.  First, this process of editing is, at least in 
theory, open to all.  Anyone with access to the Internet, either at home, at work, or in 
their community, may engage in collaborative editing. As one of the first sentences on 
Wikipedia’s “About” page states, “ Anyone  with internet access can make changes to 
Wikipedia articles…Visitors do not need specialized qualifications to contribute” 
25Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

26 (Wikipedia 2009a, emphasis added). Second, while its an open question empirically 
whether actual interactions within Wikipedia are more or less civil than ideal 
deliberation, Wikipedia has attempted to establish clear guidelines for discussion on “talk 
pages and IRC channels,” which attempt to promote civility and politeness.  For instance, 
Wikipedians are told to “assume good faith” and are instructed not to “bite the 
newcomers” (Wikipedia 2009d).  As a result of clear guidelines, and a commitment to 
civility as one of its core principles, Wikipedia promotes the procedural value of civility 
and respect (Wikipedia 2009e).  
 Wikipedia’s process of collaborative editing also appears to promote positive 
epistemic outcomes.  First, it facilitates the aggregation of vast amounts of new 
information.  The online encyclopedia now has entries on everything from esoteric 
historical figures to fringe celebrities and little known concepts.  As a result, the scope of 
Wikipedia’s entries has expanded far beyond that of rival encyclopedias.  Second, 
deliberations within Wikipedia correct and update information at an unprecedented 
speed.  While traditional encyclopedias update entries every five to ten years, 
Wikipedia’s most popular entries will have been revised to reflect the most current 
information within hours of major political and social events.  Finally, as we saw in the 
previous section, the structure of Wikipedia facilitates a process of information exchange 
with impressive levels of accuracy.  None of this is to say that Wikipedia offers 
exhaustive coverage of potential public knowledge.  While it excels at creating entries on 
popular topics with national scope, Wikipedia does not offer comprehensive information 
on local level affairs.  So while its scope has surpassed that of traditional print 
26Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

27 encyclopedias, it is worth remembering that its reach is far from extending into all areas 
of human knowledge.  
 
V.  Wikipedia’s Implications for Deliberative Democracy 
 As we have seen, Wikipedia overcomes many of the epistemic and procedural 
problems that arise in the actual practice of face-to-face deliberation.  On the one hand, it 
helps overcome the problem of group polarization.  By enabling a vast number of users to 
contribute information, Wikipedia cultivates a richly diverse contestatory space – one that 
counters group polarization.  On the other, Wikipedia helps to overcome many of the 
worries that arise from hidden profiles.  The relative anonymity of its process allows low 
status members to contribute without fear of humiliation, while also mitigating the 
problem of majority tyranny.  These procedural and epistemic virtues of Wikipedia lead 
us to conclude that when combined with face-to-face deliberation, this new mode of 
content creation could work as a powerful supplement to traditional deliberation.  
 As we have stressed throughout, however, the procedural and epistemic virtues of 
Wikipedia should not lead to the simple conclusion that this model ought to replace face-
to-face deliberation, nor should it lead us to think of Wikipedia in utopian terms.  While 
the Wikipedia model overcomes group polarization and hidden profiles in certain 
contexts, it suffers from other shortcomings that can only be overcome through the 
continued practice of deliberation in face-to-face contexts.   
The first problem – the problem of size – is that the procedural and epistemic 
virtues of Wikipedia tend to decline along with the size of the interactive community.  At 
the national or international scale, with thousands of participants, this model excels. 
27Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

28 When used at local levels or when few users participate, however, its virtues decline. The 
reason is that as participation declines and few users read or contribute to a wiki, 
prospective contributors will tend to discount the value of adding new content.  This 
problem arose when the Department of Defense used a wiki-like software tool to promote 
interdepartmental collaboration.  This system ultimately failed due to low participation 
(Thompson 2006).   Contributions were so sparse that users lacked robust incentives to 
participate.  
More important, as size decreases, the Madisonian checks that arise in the vast 
community of Wikipedia tend to decline.  This arose when the Los Angeles Times 
attempted to use wikis to allow ordinary readers to participate in the collaborative 
creation of editorials about the War in Iraq.  These “wikitorials” produced dismal 
outcomes: after just a few days, vandals had posted pornography and destroyed the 
content of these editorials (Economist 2006).  In the absence of an expansive network of 
users, such acts of vandalism and extremism could not be moderated.  The upshot of 
these examples is that the Wikipedia model only works when thousands of users 
collaborate.  In small-scale decision-making contexts, face-to-face deliberation becomes 
essential.  
   The second problem – the problem of normative content – is that while the 
Wikipedia model enables users to explore descriptive questions, it may not improve 
discussions over normative questions.  Wikipedia aims to offer descriptive knowledge.  
Its thousands of editors seek to find the “right” answers to questions of fact.  And while 
political discussion benefits from sound assessments of facts, it also has a more 
normative dimension: it is concerned with discussions of political conditions as they 
28Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

29 should be, not simply as they are .  This marks another area where face-to-face 
deliberation supplements the Wikipedia model.  When deliberations turn from descriptive 
to more normative questions involving basic values and principles, face-to-face 
deliberation excels.  Deliberation, after all, enables participants not merely to exchange 
information but to transform their existing beliefs and values – to arrive at a more 
reflective set of beliefs through discussions with others.  As Manin (1987) puts it, “The 
process of deliberation, the confrontation of various points of view, helps [citizens] to 
clarify information and to sharpen their own preferences.  They may even modify their 
initial objectives, should that prove necessary” (351).  
 The final problem – the problem of social capital – is that the relative anonymity 
of the online interactions within Wikipedia fails to cultivate social capital and solidarity 
in real-world political contexts.  Because Wikipedia thrives on a vast community of users 
scattered throughout the nation, or even the world, it fails to cultivate bonds between 
individuals at local levels.  In face-to-face deliberation, by contrast, interactions tend to 
bolster what Putnam calls “social capital” – to cultivate the virtues of “mutual support, 
cooperation, trust, [and] institutional effectiveness” (Putnam 2000, 22).  Unlike online 
interactions, the lack of anonymity in face-to-face deliberation enables homogeneous 
groups engaged in “bonding” to cultivate in-group “reciprocity” and “solidarity”, while 
also enabling heterogeneous groups engaged in “bridging” to cultivate tolerance and 
“broader identities” (Putnam 2000, 22-23).  As we have seen, such homogenous and 
heterogeneous group deliberations raise many problems.  Yet the many virtues that arise 
from cultivating social capital illustrate why the Wikipedia model ought to be thought of 
29Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

30 as a supplement – rather than a replacement – to the traditional face-to-face model of 
deliberation. 
  Given the virtues and vices of both face-to-face deliberation and the online model 
of Wikipedia, we argue that these two modes of interaction should be used to 
complement one another.   While face-to-face deliberation cultivates social capital and 
excels in smaller contexts, the Wikipedia model may counter the problems of group 
polarization and hidden profiles in larger contexts.  Similarly, while the Wikipedia model 
results in promising procedural and epistemic outcomes in large-scale contexts, the face-
to-face model of deliberation counters the problems of size, normative content, and social 
capital that emerge in online spaces.   
This mixed assessment leads us to conclude that we ought to think of these two 
modes of interaction in Madisonian terms.  Just as Madison (1987) relies on the 
“ambition” of each branch of government to counter and check the “ambitions” of others, 
we argue that the procedural and epistemic virtues of both the Wikipedia and the face-to-
face model ought to be used to check the shortcomings of the other.  
How might the Wikipedia model be used to complement traditional forms of 
deliberation?  It is beyond the scope of this essay to offer a comprehensive account of 
how this model might be applied to political decision-making.   We have, however, 
outlined a few possible ways in which this emerging form of online interaction might 
supplement traditional deliberation: 
1. State Referenda:   In states that allow citizen initiatives, it is often difficult to 
find unbiased and informative descriptions of referenda.  Using public wikis, 
citizens could create their own informational resource on the pros and cons of 
30Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

31 various measures.  Unlike more elite driven assessments, these assessments would 
ideally reflect a wider set of concerns and would lack the partisan bias of 
television, radio, and print advertisements. 
2. Evaluating Representative Performance:  Wikis might also enable citizens 
to evaluate representative performance.  They would provide citizens with a 
forum for going beyond the partisan exchange of sound bites – to construct a 
more neutral resource that examines the policies, legislative accomplishments, 
and character of representatives.   
3. Improving Government Bureaucracy:  Wikis might also provide the state 
with a tool for facilitating deliberations between and within its agencies.  The 
CIA, for instance, recently adopted the wiki principle to streamline intelligence 
gathering.  Following September 11th, intelligence agencies concluded that the 
CIA, NSA, and FBI each held valuable informational clues, which if pieced 
together might have prevented the attacks.  To encourage the exchange of 
information between agencies, the CIA has created a wiki system called 
Intellipedia that allows a vast number of agents to combine intelligence.  The 
hope is that such wikis will do to intelligence gathering what Wikipedia has done 
for encyclopedias – that they will enable users throughout the world to share 
information (Thompson 2006). 
 
Ideally, such potential applications of the Wikipedia model would enhance 
existing forms of face-to-face deliberation.  The information gathered through such 
political wikis would help to inform citizens and better equip them to enter into 
31Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

32 deliberations over political decisions.   Likewise, the face-to-face deliberations of citizens 
would help cultivate social capital, tolerance, and enable citizens to go beyond simply 
amassing information – to also explore the normative side of political questions and 
potentially even revise their existing preferences.  So if the Wikipedia model ends up 
impacting the practice of politics, it ought to be viewed as an informational resource 
capable of enhancing, but not replacing, democratic deliberation. 
 
 
 
 
32Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

33  
 
Works Cited: 
 
Aristotle. 1984. The Politics . Translated by C. Lord. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
 
Asch, Solomon.  1955.  “Opinions and Social Pressure.” Scientific America 193: 31-35.  
 
Brown, Rupert. 2000. Group Processes . Oxford: Blackwell. 
 
Cohen, Joshua. 1997 "Procedure and Substance in Deliberative Democracy." In 
Deliberative democracy: Essays on Reason and Politics, edited by  Bohman and 
Rehg. Cambridge: MIT. 
 
Cohen, Joshua. 2002. “Deliberation and Democratic Legitimacy.” In Democracy , edited 
by Estlund. New York: Blackwell Publishers. 
 
Cohen, Noam.  2009. “Wikipedia Looks Hard at Its Culture.” The New York Times 
August 30. 
 
Economist. 2006. “The Wiki Principle.” The Economist  April 22. 
 
Estlund, David M.  2008. Democratic Authority: A Philosophical Framework , N.J.: 
Princeton University Press. 
 
Estlund, David M. 1997 "Beyond Fairness and Deliberation." In Deliberative democracy: 
Essays on Reason and Politics, edited by  Bohman and Rehg. Cambridge: MIT. 
 
Habermas, Jurgen. 1979. “What is Universal Pragmatics?” In Communication and the 
Evolution of Society . Boston: Beacon Press. 
 
Habermas, Jurgen. 1997.  “Popular Sovereignty as Procedure.”  In Deliberative 
Democracy , edited by Bohman and Rehg.  Cambridge: MIT. 
 
Hastie, Daniel Gigone & Reid. 1993. “The Common Knowledge Effect: Information 
Sharing and Group Judgment.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  65: 
959-974. 
 
MacMillan, Douglas.  2009. “Wikipedia referees Scientology debate.” Business Week 
May 29 
 
Madison, James. 1987. The Federalist Papers . New York: Penguin Books. 
 
Manin, Bernard. 1987. “On Legitimacy and Political Deliberation.” Political Theory  
15.3:  338-368. 
33Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

34  
Mansbridge, Jane. 1983. Beyond Adversary Democracy . Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
 
Mendelberg, Tali. 2002. “The Deliberative Citizen: Theory and Evidence.” In Political 
Decision Making, Deliberation and Participation. New York: Elsvier Science 
Ltd. 
 
Misak, Cheryl.  2004.  “Making Disagreement Matter.” Journal of Speculative 
Philosophy 18.1: 9-22.  
 
Misak, Cheryl.  2008.  “A Culture of Justification: The Pragmatist’s Epistemic Argument 
for Democracy.” Episteme 5.1: 94-105. 
 
Nature. 2005. “Internet Encyclopedias go Head to Head.” Nature  438 (December 15): 
900-901. 
 
Dee,  Jonathan.  2007. “All the News That’s Fit to Print Out.” The New York Times July 
1. 
 
Nino, Carlos. 1996. The Constitution of Deliberative Democracy . New Haven: Yale. 
 
NPR: Talk of the Nation, “Analysis: Wikipedia, Open Source, and the Future of the 
Web,” transcript, November 2, 2005. 
 
Pettit, Philip. 2000. “Democracy, Electoral and Contestatory.” In Designing Democratic 
Institutions , edited by I. S. a. S. Macedo. New York: NYU Press. 
 
Putnam, Robert. 2000. Bowling Alone. New York: Simon and Schuster.  
 
Rawls, John.  1996.  Political Liberalism. Paperback edition. New York: Columbia 
University Press.  
 
Sanders, Lynn M. 1997. “Against Deliberation.” Political Theory  25.3: 347-376. 
 
Schiff, Stacy. 2006. “Know it All.” The New Yorker  July 31. 
 
Smith, Marc and Peter Kollock. 1999.  1999. Communities in Cyberspace . New York, 
Routledge. 
 
Sunstein, Cass. 2000. Deliberative Trouble? Why Groups go to Extremes. The Yale Law 
Journal  110.1: 71-119. 
 
Sunstein, Cass. 2001. Republic.com . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 
34Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4

35 Sunstein, Cass.  2002.  “The Law of Group Polarization.”  Journal of Political 
Philosophy 10.2: 175-195.  
 
Sunstein, Cass.  2003.  Why Societies Need Dissent . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
 
Sunstein, Cass. 2006. Infotopia. New York: Oxford University Press. 
 
Talisse, Robert.  2004.  “Towards a Peircean Politics of Inquiry.” Transactions of the C. 
S. Peirce Society  40.1: 21-38 
 
Talisse, Robert.  2007. “From Pragmatism to Perfectionism: Cheryl Misak's Epistemic 
Deliberativism.” Philosophy & Social Criticism 33.3: 387-406. 
 
Thompson, Dennis and Amy Gutmann.  2004. Why Deliberative Democracy? Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 
Thompson, Clive. 2006. “Rewiring the Spy.” The New York Times Magazine  December 
3. 
 
Titus, William and Garold Stasser. 1985. “Pooling of Unshared Information in Group 
Discussion.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  48:1467-1478. 
 
Titus, William and Garold Stasser. 2003. “Hidden Profiles: A Brief History.” 
Psychological Inquiry  14: 304-313. 
 
Tocqueville, Alexis De. 2004. Democracy and America. Translated by A. Goldhammer. 
New York: The Library of America. 
 
Wikipedia. 2006a. About Page. Wikipedia. 
 
Wikipedia. 2006b. Wikipedia Policies.  Wikipedia. 
 
Wikipedia. 2006c. Talk Page: Abortion.  Wikipedia. 
 
Wikipedia. 2008. Annual Report. Retrieved June 14, 2009, from 
http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Annual_Report  
 
Wikipedia. 2009a. About Page. Wikipedia. 
 
Wikipedia. 2009b. Revision Control. Wikipedia. 
 
Wikipedia 2009d. Wikipedia Behavioral Guidelines. Wikipedia.  
 
Wikipedia 2009e. Five pillars. Wikipedia.  
 
35Klemp and Forcehimes: From Town-Halls to Wikis

36 Wikipedia. 2009f. What Wikipedia is not. Wikipedia. 
 
Wikipedia. 2009g. Wikipedia is in the real world. Wikipedia. 
 
Wikipedia. 2009h. WikiScanner. Wikipedia. 
 
Wikipedia 2010a. Why create an account? Wikipedia. 
36Journal of Public Deliberation, Vol. 6 [2010], Iss. 2, Art. 4
https://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol6/iss2/art4