Bias in Wikipedia
Christoph Hube
L3S Research Center, Leibniz University of Hannover
Hannover, Germany
Supervised by Claudia Niederee
hube@L3S.de
ABSTRACT
While studies have shown that Wikipedia articles exhibit
quality that is comparable to conventional encyclopedias, re-
search still proves that Wikipedia, overall, is prone to many
dierent types of Neutral Point of View (NPOV) violations
that are explicitly or implicitly caused by bias from its edi-
tors. Related work focuses on political, cultural and gender
bias. We are developing an approach for detecting both ex-
plicit and implicit bias in Wikipedia articles and observing
its evolution over time. Our approach is based on dierent
factors of bias, with the most important ones being language
style, editors, and citations. In this paper we present the ap-
proach, methodology and a rst analysis.
1. PROBLEM
The Neutral Point of View (NPOV) is one of the main
principles of Wikipedia. It demands Wikipedia editors to
put their personal opinions on a topic aside and create ob-
jective content. According to the NPOV policy, within an
article, all important opinions on a topic should be repre-
sented without any attempt on trying to convince the reader
of any of the presented views.
Describing dierent points of view (POV) is indeed quite
uncommon for an encyclopedia and the results of this pro-
cess do not always convince every editor and reader. While
studies have shown that Wikipedia articles exhibit quality
that is comparable to conventional encyclopedias [9], re-
search still proves that Wikipedia, overall, is prone to many
dierent types of NPOV violations that are caused by bias
resulting from its editors. Research presents dierent types
of bias, such as gender bias [23], cultural bias [1], and polit-
ical bias [12]. Bias can be explicit, e.g. when statements in
an article support a certain POV, or when the cited sources
are politically biased [14]. In the case of implicit bias, an
article focuses on a specic aspect of the topic but omits
other aspects of equal importance.
In some cases, where editors do not nd an agreement, the
disputes about the content of an article lead to an edit war .
Two or more opposing sides each struggle to strengthen one
c2017 International World Wide Web Conference Committee
(IW3C2), published under Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 License.
WWW’17 Companion, April 3–7, 2017, Perth, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-4914-7/17/04.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3041021.3053375
.POV in the article's content by permanently adding text
supporting their own POV or removing text that supports
the opponent's POV (typically by reverting the edit). An
usual cause of edit wars in Wikipedia articles are controver-
sial topics. Examples are Global Warming ,Homosexuality
andAbortion [21]. The edit war about the article Gamergate
Controversy1drew public attention after several editors had
been sanctioned and even Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales
took part in the discussion. Supporters of the gamergate
movement state that the Wikipedia article is highly biased
towards a pro feministic and pro journalistic POV2.
In a conict between two groups of editors AandBit
can happen that group Aoverpowers group Bbecause of
a higher number of supporters or because of the support-
ers being more experienced or technically skilled. As a re-
sult, the article is very likely to contain bias towards the
POV of group A. Morgan et al. [17] show an example for
this kind of situation. In the controversial article Jyllands-
Posten Muhammad Cartoon Controversy3the group of more
western oriented editors overpowered another group that
tried to remove images taken from the Muhammad Cartoons
that were depicted in the article. The analysis of Morgan et
al. suggests that the English Wikipedia contains a western
cultural bias even though it is intended to be a source for
people from all nations and cultures. Wagner et al. [23]
nd that many Wikipedia articles show gender bias which
might be caused by the fact that only 15% of Wikipedia
editors are female. Wikipedia was also criticized by chris-
tian conservatives for showing strong liberal bias. They state
that\[a]lthough Wikipedia claims to have credibility because
anyone can edit it, in fact the website represents the view-
point of its most strident and persistent editors."4. This ac-
cusation even led to the creation of Conservapedia5, a Wiki
shaped according to right-conservative ideas.
In this thesis we tackle bias in Wikipedia, and dene6it as
a form of over-representation of one or more POVs compared
to all existing POVs, hence, an explicit or implicit violation
of the NPOV principle. Is the bias a result of one group
of editors overpowering another group (as in the example of
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamergate_controversy
2https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/23/
wikipedia-bans-editors-from-gender-related-articles-
amid-gamergate-controversy
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jyllands-Posten_Muhammad_
cartoons_controversy
4http://www.conservapedia.com/Examples_of_Bias_in_
Wikipedia
5http://www.conservapedia.com
6Related work similarly denes the dierent types of bias.
717


theCartoon Controversy )? Or did the editor(s) not know
about dierent opinions on the topic (a phenomena known
as\echo chambers" [7])? Secondly, we observe how bias in
Wikipedia evolves. Providing enough time and editors, is
bias a recurrent factor or will the content of a Wikipedia
article converge to an unbiased content?
Desired properties of our approach are:
1. Determine the factors of implicit/explicit bias
2. Describe the evolution of bias
Given these two problems we postulate the following re-
search questions:
RQ1: What are the factors of bias in Wikipedia?
RQ2: How does bias in Wikipedia evolve?
RQ1 covers the detection of bias using dierent factors as
evidence. Closely related to this question is the question
of what causes bias in the rst place. We plan to analyze
which factors are crucial for the detection of explicit bias
and which factors provide evidence of implicit bias.
RQ2 focuses on the evolution of bias over time. We will
analyze which parameters (e.g. number of editors), user
actions (e.g. deletes) and external events (e.g. elections,
scandals) have an inuence on the bias of an article.
We believe that bias detection and the neutrality of public
knowledge sources such as Wikipedia are crucial for people's
opinion forming and the breaking of echo chambers.
2. STATE OF THE ART
In this section we give an overview of related work on
dierent types of bias with a focus on Wikipedia.
2.1 Bias in Wikipedia
Some aspects of bias in Wikipedia and in collective intel-
ligence systems in general have already been studied. Das
and Lavoie [3] make use of editor behavior and interactions
between editors to determine the topics an editor is inter-
ested in and the editor's stance. The assumption is that an
editor who reverts the change of another editor, they are
likely to disagree. To infer topics and POV of an editor,
they use a modied LDA approach in which editors play the
role of documents and Wikipedia articles act as words. For
evaluation they detect pairs of antagonistic editors which
have reported each other. Das and Lavoie also look at the
Wikipedia revision history to study the evolution of bias in
Wikipedia. They show that bias exists for example where
articles on otherwise controversial topics are dominated by
a single POV in Wikipedia. This approach diers from our
approach in the way that it only focuses on editor interac-
tions and at the topical level, without including other causes
of bias, such as the cited sources, the language of editors.
We see their work as complementary to ours.
In previous work Das et al [4] analyzed the behavior of
Wikipedia admins. They found cases in which Wikipedia
editors followed the rules to become admins and shortly af-
ter their promotion changed their behavior by forcing their
POV on specic topics. These ndings are alarming since
they show that editors often try to hide their intentions and
act objective even though being clearly biased. This reveals
another major concern with Wikipedia admins and their in-
uence on the objectivity of an article.
Greenstein and Zhu [12] study political bias in Wikipedia
by measuring how much an article is leaning to the liberal orconservative side. They make use of [8], which was initially
developed to determine the political slant of newspapers by
looking for 1000 specic phrases that were typically used by
democratic or republican congress members. Greenstein and
Zhu use this approach on articles related to American poli-
tics. They nd that in its early years Wikipedia on average
used to have a liberal bias but that this bias decreased with
time. While the number of revisions and editors working on
an article usually has a small reducing eect on the bias, the
main reason for the decline is the fact that the number of
articles has grown so much that the liberal bias plays a less
important role on average. The approach in [12] has a clear
disadvantage. It relies heavily on the given list of phrases
and it is questionable if an old list still has a strong enough
meaning to be used as a base for measuring political bias.
2.2 Cultural bias in Wikipedia
The term cultural bias is used in dierent contexts in re-
search about Wikipedia. On one side it refers to dierences
between Wikipedia language versions, such as the focus of a
language version on specic topics or persons [1] or dierent
language versions showing dierent POVs or dierent sen-
timents on the same topic ([25, 26]). The term also refers
to the western bias of English Wikipedia on some topics as
shown by Morgan et al. [17].
2.3 Gender bias in Wikipedia
Several studies have analyzed the representation of women
in Wikipedia compared to that of men ([23, 19, 11]). Wagner
et al. [23] do their analysis regarding the dimensions cover-
age bias (number of articles about notable women compared
to that of men), structural bias (links between Wikipedia ar-
ticles, e.g. do articles about women link articles about men
more often than vice versa?), lexical bias (vocabulary used
to describe women and men) and visibility bias (How many
articles of men and women make it to Wikipedia's front
page?). Their results show that women are not underrep-
resented in Wikipedia but are often presented in a dierent
way, for example an article about a woman is more likely
to contain information about the family and romantic re-
lationships. Reagle and Rhue [19] compare gender bias in
Wikipedia and Encyclopedia Britannica and conclude that
Wikipedia has more and longer articles on women but at the
same time articles on women are more likely to be missing
in Wikipedia compared to articles on men.
2.4 Political bias in News and Social Media
Lance [14] shows that news media are inherently biased in
their reporting. Researchers found that some media outlets
(e.g. The Guardian, New York Times, New Yorker ) are pre-
ferred by more liberal thinking persons while other outlets
(e.g. Fox News, Breitbart, The Blaze ) are preferred by more
conservative thinking persons7.
Research shows that the bias of a news outlet can be de-
termined. Dallmann et al [2] use measures for coverage bias
(party as main article, mentions of party and party mem-
bers) and statement bias (sentiment analysis, vocabulary
similarity) to determine the political slant of German news-
papers towards dierent German political parties. Zhou et
al. [24] leverage user reactions to news articles to classify
news as either liberal or conservative.
7http://www.journalism.org/2014/10/21/political-
polarization-media-habits/
718

Most work on measuring political bias in social media fo-
cuses on Twitter and determining the political leaning of
Twitter users using their tweet contents and relations to
other users ([10],[20],[15]). Makazhanov et al. [16] show
that language features can be used as a strong indicator
for political leaning. They build language models from all
tweets of a political party's candidates and match these with
the language models of other Twitter users to determine if
these users have a political leaning towards one of the par-
ties. Pennacchiotti et al. [18] also report that language
features perform better than social graph features for deter-
mining political leanings in Twitter. These ndings can not
be transferred directly to Wikipedia since language style in
Twitter diers from that used in Wikipedia.
3. PROPOSED APPROACH
To answer our two research questions, we analyze possible
factors of bias in Wikipedia. The factors presented in this
chapter will work as evidence to detect bias (both explicit
and implicit) and observe the evolution of it. While our
analysis is proceeding, more factors might be added.
We analyze the following factors in the context of RQ1:
1.1 Language Style
1.2 Editors
1.3 Cited Sources
1.4 Gatekeeping and Coverage of Topics
Language Style.
The language used by an editor can be an indicator of its
opinion on a topic, and thus leads to explicit bias in an ar-
ticle. For example, it makes a signicant dierence whether
an article refers to a group as \soldiers" or as \terrorists".
Language features have proven to be eective when deter-
mining the political leaning of a user on Twitter [18]. In
Wikipedia, however, tasks like sentiment analysis might be
harder since editors tend to use a more neutral style of writ-
ing. We are planning to include a phrase based approach
analog to Greenstein and Zhu [12] that uses lists of terms
and phrases that are typically used by one of the opposing
sides in a conict. The lists have to be up to date and must
t the particular topic. We plan to mine lists of biased terms
(e.g. \terrorist") in order to detect biased statements.
Editors.
Das et al. [4] showed that even Wikipedia admins in some
cases tend to show strong bias and are forcing their opinion
on articles. Can bias be measured by determining the editors
that were involved in the creation of an article given that
we are able to obtain basic information about these editors,
such as the statements that an editor added and removed or
which other articles it has worked on? Are specic editors
(e.g. novices, veterans, admins, editors working on dierent
topics or editors working on one topic) more likely to add
biased content than others? The advantage of analyzing ed-
itors over analyzing whole articles is that while articles can
contain parts with dierent bias, for editors we can assume
that each editor has only a single POV on a topic. Based on
their contributions we plan to create proles for editors in-
cluding their interests, expertise, and bias on certain topics.
We will also look at how editors cooperate ([13, 3]) and how
groups of editors with similar opinions form. This brings
us close to the work about echo chambers [7, 22]. In some
cases editors might not be aware of their own bias due toa lack of opinion diversity in Wikipedia. We will use the
Wikipedia history to extract the text that has been added
or deleted by an editor. Through the revisions of all articles
in a Wikipedia language version we determine which articles
and categories an editor has worked on.
Cited Sources.
Wikipedia demands of its editors to cite sources to prove
their statements. Statements without a reference to an ac-
cepted source are likely to be removed. An often used source
are news media [5] which are proven to be biased [14], e.g.
by covering specic topics in more detail than others. It is
likely that an editor cites a source that supports his POV.
For example some media outlets in the US are known to
show liberal and conservative bias. Citing only typically
liberal newspapers could show that an editor has a liberal
political bias. An example for media bias is the MH17 ight
crash in the Ukraine in 2014. While western media outlets
like CNN made Russian separatists responsible for attacking
the plane, Russian news media such as RT published news
stories that should show that the attack was carried out by
Ukrainian soldiers8. In this thesis, we will focus only on
news sources (apart from other cited sources in Wikipedia
like web, blogs etc.), due to quality aspects, which tend to
be more authoritative than other sources like blogs, etc.
Gatekeeping and Coverage of Topics.
Saez et al. [20] use gatekeeping and coverage as features
to measure bias of news outlets and related communities on
Twitter. We are planning to use these features to detect im-
plicit bias in Wikipedia. In our case, Gatekeeping refers to
the topics that are or are not included in an article. For ex-
ample the article about Donald Trump does not contain the
accusation of Trump harassing a teenage girl, even though
this topic has been covered by the media9. Coverage refers
to the extent by which certain topics are covered. An exam-
ple could be that the controversy section of a biographical
article is larger than any other section of the article.
We assume that analyzing the possible factors of bias will
give us a better understanding of bias in Wikipedia. Since
articles in Wikipedia are dynamic, meaning they can be
changed at any time, the bias of an article can also be con-
sidered to be dynamic. Changes, like adding, deleting and
reverting inuence the bias of an article. We want to analyze
how the bias of an article evolves over time while editors are
shaping the article. Therefore we are analyzing the following
aspects of bias evolution in the context of RQ2:
2.1 How does the number of edits change bias?
2.2 How does the number of editors change bias?
2.3 Does a delete or revert improve bias?
2.4 Do specic events change bias?
How does the number of edits change bias?.
The number of edits for an article is a monotonically in-
creasing function over time. As this number increases does
the bias decrease? Does it converge to a normal distribution,
where the initial revisions of the entity are more biased and
with time the bias tends to normalize to a given average?
8https://www.buzzfeed.com/maxseddon/russian-tv-airs-
clearly-fake-image-to-claim-ukraine-shot-dow
9http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/12/trumps-harassment-
of-an-18-year-old-girl-on-twitter-led-to-death-
threats.html
719

How does the number of editors change bias?.
Linus' Law [12] suggests that increasing the number of
reviewers will improve the quality of an article. Does this
really hold or are too many contributors counterproductive?
Does the expertise of the editors matter? How does the di-
versity of editors, with respect to their expertise based on
the categories they are working on inuence the bias? Is
it counterproductive for the quality of the article if all edi-
tors are from the same community and edit only on certain
categories (echo chamber)?
Does a delete or revert improve bias?.
Wikipedia editors can delete or revert existing text that
was added earlier by another editor. Once we have extracted
the deletes a specic editor has performed on an article, we
can analyze whether one delete has inuenced the bias of an
article by comparing the article's versions before and after
the delete. We are planning to analyze which types of deletes
and reverts have what impact, e.g. deleting a (specic type
of) citation, deleting specic terms or phrases.
Do speciﬁc events change bias?.
Do real world events that are related to the article change
the bias? First we will analyze if an event leads to a peak in
the number of edits or deletes on some articles. Then we will
check if dierent types of events (elections, sport scandals,
or wars) have dierent impacts.
While there have been some attempts to measure the bias
of an article [3, 12], none of these approaches have included
multiple factors of bias. We are planning to analyze dier-
ent factors of bias in Wikipedia, also including factors that
have not been analyzed before, such as the sources that have
been cited by an editor. In contrast to most of the related
work, our analysis will not focus on complete articles directly
but will instead separate text added by dierent editors to
achieve a better understanding on how dierent editors be-
have. Furthermore we are not only planning to measure bias
but also to observe the evolution of bias over time.
4. METHODOLOGY
While the methodological part is in its early beginning,
here, we lay out the basic idea on the directions we are
looking into analyzing the dierent bias factors and bias
evolution as part of RQ1 and RQ2.
Firstly, for each Wikipedia article and its revisions we will
decompose it in the following atomic parts: (i) section and
subsections, (ii) involved editors, (iii) statements added by
individual editors, (iv) sources cited by individual editors,
(v) editor interactions (e.g. revert), and (vi) editor proles
(in terms of Wikipedia categories). This decomposition will
allow us to isolate the dierent factors we aim to analyze,
and propose sound solutions therein. In the following we
sketch methodological aspects for the individual components
we aim to analyze in Section 3.
Language Style. Following the approach in [12], we aim
at mining phrase and word lists, which we will categorize
into the dierent POV labels (liberal, conservative, etc., or
any other arbitrary stances on a topic). We aim to do so
by analyzing the editor interactions for a given article, and
mine the phrases and words from the respective statements
added by the corresponding editors. Finally, for the task of
categorizing the dierent phrases, we will employ supervised
machine learning approaches.Editors. In this aspect, we will present editors into a
multi-dimensional prole which contains attributes such as:
topics (in terms of Wikipedia categories), cited sources, word
representation and the respective categories (as provided by
the language features), and editor interactions. Finally, we
employ community detection techniques and detected com-
munities from the individual editors through their proles .
Cited Sources. Here we focus on categorizing the news
sources according to coverage. We aim at detecting the topic
coverage and the stance of newspapers towards a specic
topic. We use the Wikipedia article title and additionally
the statements added by the editors to retrieve the matching
news articles. For this we employ the approach proposed in
[6]. Next, based on the categorized phrase and word lists, we
will categorize the news sources accordingly. In order to have
clean and meaningful categorization of news sources, we will
extract the facts from such news articles and categorize only
those phrases and words which are attributed to the entities
(in this case Wikipedia articles) of interest.
In the case of RQ2, here we aim at providing a detailed
analysis about the dynamics of bias in Wikipedia. The anal-
ysis here is intertwined with the models built in RQ1. At
each state of a Wikipedia article based on our models we are
able to measure the bias in an article as a means of over-
representation of editors, sources etc., of a specic POV.
Therefore, between each transition of an article from revi-
sionr1tor2we can measure the dierence in terms of bias.
The main aim of this analysis is to provide a general model
for bias in Wikipedia, which would make aware Wikipedia
admins, and editors in general, about the content they are
adding in an article. Furthermore, this could be used as
an internal tool and ag suspicious edits which violate the
NPOV policy of Wikipedia.
Evaluation.
An open question in this proposal remains the evaluation
of the proposed models. This is a hard task since getting
a ground truth for bias in Wikipedia is not trivial. One
possibility could be to rely on expert evaluation (for smaller
datasets) or crowdsourcing (for larger datasets). Breaking
the main tasks into subtasks would make them easier to
handle. Some of the subtasks would be Evaluating phrase
and word lists ,Checking if editors have the same POV , and
Categorizing news sources .
5. RESULTS
In order to test some aspects of our approach, we per-
formed a rst analysis on the Wikipedia article Malaysia
Airlines Flight 17 (MH17)10about the ight crash in the
Ukraine in 2014. As we mentioned in 3, the incident was
perceived dierently in western media compared to Russian
media. We analyzed how this is reected in the Wikipedia
article, i.e. to which extent both POVs are represented.
The article was created on July 17th 2014 (the day of
the incident) and was revisited 6522 times by 1083 dierent
editors (including 75 edits by 15 dierent bots). 67.4% of
the edits were done by the top 10 most active editors11.
This already shows that a small group of editors has a high
inuence on the article's content and could possibly shape
it according to their POV. The current version of the article
10https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MH17
11https://tools.wmflabs.org/xtools-articleinfo/?article=
Malaysia_Airlines_Flight_17&project=en.wikipedia.org
720

contains 15 sections with the section on investigations about
the cause of the crash being the largest one. There exists
also a separate section on Russian media reception.
For our analysis we retrieved the revision history of the
article using the Wikimedia API12. From the revisions we
extracted the text and all citations added by each editor.
From our obtained table we removed all editors who added
less than three citations. Of the remaining 77 editors 51
cited only non-Russian sources. The other 26 editors cited
both Russian and non-Russian sources with only 7 editors
citing more than 50% Russian sources. This indicates that
the pro-Russian POV is underrepresented in the article. We
took a closer look at the editor with the highest percentage
of citations to Russian sources (6 out of 7). The editor
performed 28 edits on the article trying to add evidence
published by the Russian government into the Cause of the
Crash section of the article. He also changed the phrasing of
multiple sentences from an anti-Russian wording to a more
neutral or sometimes pro-Russian wording. Most of his edits
were reverted by other editors.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We gave an overview over the topic of bias in Wikipedia,
including the state of the art in research, and presented our
new approach based on dierent factors. In section 1 we in-
troduced our two research questions based on the problems
of how to detect explicit and implicit bias and how to observe
the evolution of bias. In section 3 we discussed dierent fac-
tors of bias in Wikipedia for which we presented possible
methods in 4. Our analysis on the article Malaysia Airlines
Flight 17 indicates a pro-western bias. It also shows that ci-
tations can be used to identify editors who are actively trying
to change the article's content according to their POV.
We plan to concretize the use of the dierent bias factors
presented in this paper and analyze how well they perform
when used as evidence for the detection of explicit or implicit
bias. Future analysis will be conducted on a bigger set of
articles and will also include information about deleted text.
7. REFERENCES
[1] E. S. Callahan and S. C. Herring. Cultural bias in
wikipedia content on famous persons. JASIST , 62(10),
2011.
[2] A. Dallmann, F. Lemmerich, D. Zoller, and A. Hotho.
Media bias in german online newspapers. In 26th
Hypertext, 2015.
[3] S. Das and A. Lavoie. Automated inference of point of
view from user interactions in collective intelligence
venues. In ICML , 2014.
[4] S. Das, A. Lavoie, and M. Magdon-Ismail.
Manipulation among the arbiters of collective
intelligence: How wikipedia administrators mold
public opinion. In 22nd CIKM . ACM, 2013.
[5] B. Fetahu, A. Anand, and A. Anand. How much is
wikipedia lagging behind news? In Proceedings of the
ACM Web Science Conference , page 28. ACM, 2015.
[6] B. Fetahu, K. Markert, W. Nejdl, and A. Anand.
Finding news citations for wikipedia. In Proceedings of
the 25th CIKM , pages 337{346. ACM, 2016.
[7] R. K. Garrett. Echo chambers online?: Politically
motivated selective exposure among internet news
12https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/API:Revisionsusers1. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 14(2), 2009.
[8] M. Gentzkow and J. M. Shapiro. What drives media
slant? evidence from us daily newspapers.
Econometrica , 78(1), 2010.
[9] J. Giles. Internet encyclopaedias go head to head.
Nature, 438(7070), 2005.
[10] J. Golbeck and D. Hansen. Computing political
preference among twitter followers. In SIGCHI . ACM,
2011.
[11] E. Graells-Garrido, M. Lalmas, and F. Menczer. First
women, second sex: gender bias in wikipedia. In 26th
Hypertext . ACM, 2015.
[12] S. Greenstein and F. Zhu. Collective intelligence and
neutral point of view: the case of wikipedia. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.
[13] B. Keegan, D. Gergle, and N. Contractor. Hot o the
wiki: dynamics, practices, and structures in
wikipedia's coverage of the t ohoku catastrophes. In
7th WikiSym . ACM, 2011.
[14] B. W. Lance. News: The politics of illusion. White
Plains, NY: Longman , 1996.
[15] H. Lu, J. Caverlee, and W. Niu. Biaswatch: A
lightweight system for discovering and tracking
topic-sensitive opinion bias in social media. In 24th
CIKM, 2015.
[16] A. Makazhanov, D. Raei, and M. Waqar. Predicting
political preference of twitter users. Social Network
Analysis and Mining , 4(1), 2014.
[17] J. T. Morgan, R. M. Mason, and K. Nahon.
Negotiating cultural values in social media: A case
study from wikipedia. In 45th HICSS . IEEE, 2012.
[18] M. Pennacchiotti and A.-M. Popescu. Democrats,
republicans and starbucks acionados: user
classication in twitter. In 17th SIGKDD , 2011.
[19] J. Reagle and L. Rhue. Gender bias in wikipedia and
britannica. International Journal of Communication ,
5, 2011.
[20] D. Saez-Trumper, C. Castillo, and M. Lalmas. Social
media news communities: gatekeeping, coverage, and
statement bias. In 22nd CIKM . ACM, 2013.
[21] R. Sumi, T. Yasseri, A. Rung, A. Kornai, and
J. Kert esz. Edit wars in wikipedia. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1107.3689 , 2011.
[22] V. Vydiswaran, C. Zhai, D. Roth, and P. Pirolli.
Biastrust: Teaching biased users about controversial
topics. In 21st CIKM . ACM, 2012.
[23] C. Wagner, D. Garcia, M. Jadidi, and M. Strohmaier.
It's a man's wikipedia? assessing gender inequality in
an online encyclopedia. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1501.06307 , 2015.
[24] D. X. Zhou, P. Resnick, and Q. Mei. Classifying the
political leaning of news articles and users from user
votes. In ICWSM , 2011.
[25] Y. Zhou, A. I. Cristea, and Z. Roberts. Is wikipedia
really neutral? a sentiment perspective study of
war-related wikipedia articles since 1945. In 29th
PACLIC , 2015.
[26] Y. Zhou, E. Demidova, and A. I. Cristea. Who likes
me more?: analysing entity-centric language-specic
bias in multilingual wikipedia. In 31st SAC . ACM,
2016.
721