LARRYSANGER.ORG
Search... Blog Projects Writing About
WWikipedia Is Badly Biased
May 14, 2020•311 comments
The Uncyclopedia logo. Maybe more
appropriate for Wikipedia itself now.
ikipediaʼs “NPOV” is dead.1 The original policy long since
forgotten, Wikipedia no longer has an eﬀective neutrality policy.
There is a rewritten policy, but it endorses the utterly bankrupt
canard that journalists should avoid what they call “false
balance.”2 The notion that we should avoid “false balance” is directly contradictory
to the original neutrality policy. As a result, even as journalists turn to opinion and
activism, Wikipedia now touts controversial points of view on politics, religion, and
science. Here are some examples from each of these subjects, which were easy to
ﬁnd, no hunting around. Many, many more could be given.
Examples have become embarrassingly easy to ﬁnd. The Barack Obama article
completely fails to mention many well-known scandals: Benghazi, the IRS scandal,
the AP phone records scandal, and Fast and Furious, to say nothing of Solyndra or
the Hillary Clinton email server scandal—or, of course, the developing “Obamagate”
story in which Obama was personally involved in surveilling Donald Trump. A fair10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 1/11

Wikipediaʼs favorite
president?
article about a major political ﬁgure certainly must include the
bad with the good. Beyond that, a neutral article must fairly
represent competing views on the ﬁgure by the major parties.
In other words—and this is the point crucial to evaluating an
articleʼs neutrality—a neutral article is written not to take sides
on issues of controversy. It does not matter whether one or both
sides believe their point of view is totally factual and supported
with incontrovertible proof. How many times, in politics and in
many walks of life, have we seen controversies in which both
sides can cite apparently rigorous studies, or chapter and verse, or original source
material that, they claim, show their view is absolutely certain? In such cases, a
neutral resource like Wikipedia is bound by policy not to take a side. Yet it does.
Political scandals are a good example where sources are carefully lined up on both
sides. There were many controversies over “scandals” plaguing Obamaʼs presidency.
But in fact, the only scandals that I could ﬁnd in Wikipediaʼs Obama article were a
few that the left ﬁnds at least a little scandalous, such as Snowdenʼs revelations
about NSA activities under Obama. In short, the article is almost a total whitewash.
You might ﬁnd this to be objectively correct,if you are a Democrat; but you cannot
claim that this is a neutral treatment, considering that the other major U.S. party
would, citing other ostensibly credible sources, treat the subject very diﬀerently. On
such topics, neutrality in any sense worth the name essentially requires that readers
not be able to detect the editorsʼ political alignment.
Meanwhile, as you can imagine, the idea that the Donald
Trump article is neutral is a joke. Just for example, there are
5,224 none-too-ﬂattering words in the “Presidency” section. By
contrast, the following “Public Proﬁle” (which the Obama
article entirely lacks), “Investigations,” and “Impeachment”
sections are unrelentingly negative, and together add up to
some 4,545 words—in other words, the controversy sections are
almost as long as the sections about his presidency. Common
words in the article are “false” and “falsely” (46 instances):10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 2/11

Not Wikipediaʼs favorite
president
“Prior to prohibition,
cannabis was
available freely in a
variety of forms,” says
Wikipedia, helpfully.Wikipedia frequently asserts, in its own voice, that many of
Trumpʼs statements are “false.” Well, perhaps they are. But even
if they are, it is not exactly neutral for an encyclopedia article
to say so, especially without attribution. You might approve of Wikipedia describing
Trumpʼs incorrect statements as “false,” very well; but then you must admit that you
no longer support a policy of neutrality on Wikipedia. More to the point,
Republican, Trump-supporting views are basically not represented at all in the
article on Trump.
I leave the glowing Hillary Clinton article as an exercise for the reader.
On political topics it is easiest to argue for the profound beneﬁts—even the moral
necessity—of eliminating bias in reference works. As I argue in my 2015 essay, “Why
Neutrality” (updated in Essays on Free Knowledge) we naturally desire neutrality on
political and many other topics because we want to be left free to make up our own
minds. Reference, news, and educational resources aimed at laying out a subject in
general should give us the tools we need to rationally decide what we want to think.
Only those who want to force the minds of others can be opposed to neutrality.
Wikipedia can be counted on to cover not just political ﬁgures,
but political issues as well from a liberal-left point of view. No
conservative would write, in an abortion article, “When properly
done, abortion is one of the safest procedures in medicine,” a
claim that is questionable on its face, considering what an
invasive, psychologically distressing, and sometimes lengthy
procedure it can be even when done according to modern
medical practices. More to the point, abortion opponents
consider the fetus to be a human being with rights; their view,
that it is not safe for the baby, is utterly ignored. To pick another,
random issue, drug legalization, dubbed drug liberalization by
Wikipedia, has only a little information about any potential
hazards of drug legalization policies; it mostly serves as a brief
for legalization, followed by a catalog of drug policies worldwide.
Or to take an up-to-the-minute issue, the LGBT adoption article10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 3/11

Gospel reliability is
“uncertain,” Wikipedia
says, neutrally.includes several talking points in favor of LGBT adoption rights, but omits any
arguments against. On all such issues, the point is that true neutrality, to be carefully
distinguished from objectivity, requires that the article be written in a way that
makes it impossible to determine the editorsʼ position on the important
controversies the article touches on.
What about articles on religious topics? The ﬁrst article I
thought to look at had some pretty egregious instances of bias:
the Jesus article. It simply asserts, again in its own voice, that
“the quest for the historical Jesus has yielded major uncertainty
on the historical reliability of the Gospels and on how closely
the Jesus portrayed in the Bible reﬂects the historical Jesus.” In
another place, the article simply asserts, “the gospels are not
independent nor consistent records of Jesusʼ life.” A great many
Christians would take issue with such statements, which means
they are not neutral for that reason alone. In other words, the
very fact that many Christians, including many deeply educated
conservative seminarians, believe in the historical reliability of
the Gospels, and that they are wholly consistent, means that the
article is biased if it simply asserts, without attribution or qualiﬁcation, that this is a
matter of “major uncertainty.” Now, it would be accurate and neutral to say it is
widely disputed, but being “disputed” and being “uncertain” are very diﬀerent
concepts. It is in fact a controversial view that the historical accuracy of the Gospels
is uncertain; others disagree, holding that, upon analysis, it is not a matter of
signiﬁcant uncertainty. In other respects, the article can be fairly described as a
“liberal” academic discussion of Jesus, focusing especially on assorted diﬃculties
and controversies, while failing to explain traditional, orthodox, or fundamentalist
views of those issues. So it might be “liberal academic,” but it ignores conservative
academic and traditional views. Therefore, what it is not is neutral, not in the
original sense we deﬁned for Wikipedia.
Of course, similarly tendentious claims can be found in other articles on religious
topics, as when the Christ (title) article claims,10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 4/11

Although the original followers of Jesus believed Jesus to be the Jewish
messiah, e.g. in the Confession of Peter, Jesus was usually referred to as
“Jesus of Nazareth” or “Jesus, son of Joseph”.[11] Jesus came to be called
“Jesus Christ” (meaning “Jesus the Khristós”, i.e. “Jesus the Messiah” or “Jesus
the Anointed”) by later Christians, who believe that his cruciﬁxion and
resurrection fulﬁll the messianic prophecies of the Old Testament.
This article weirdly claims, or implies, a thing that no serious Biblical scholar of any
sort would claim, viz., that Jesus was not given the title “Christ” by the original
Apostles in the New Testament. The Wikipedia article itself later contradicts that
claim, so perhaps the editors of the above paragraph simply meant the two
conjoined words “Jesus Christ,” and that Jesus was rarely referred to with those two
conjoined words in the New Testament. But this is false, too: the two words are
found together in that form throughout the New Testament.
But the eﬀect of the above-quoted paragraph is to cast doubt that the title “Christ”
was used much at all by the original Apostles and disciples. That would be silly if so.
These supposed “later Christians” who used “Christ” would have to include the
Apostles Peter (Jesusʼ ﬁrst apostle), Paul (converted a few years after Jesusʼ
cruciﬁxion), and Jude (Jesusʼ brother), who were the authors of the bulk of the
epistles of the New Testament. The word “Christ” can, of course, be found
frequently in the epistles, including very early epistles, thought to be the ﬁrst texts
written about Jesus.3 Of course, those are not exactly “later Christians.” If the claim
is simply that the word “Christ” does not appear at all or much in the Gospels, that is
false, as a simple text search uncovers dozens of instances in all four Gospels,4 and
about 550 instances in the entire New Testament. If it is used somewhat less in the
Gospels, that would be a reﬂection of the fact that the authors of the Gospels were,
argumentatively, using the Hebrew word “Messiah” to persuade Jewish readers that
Jesus was the long-awaited Jewish messiah. But the word means much the same as
the Greek title “Christ”: the anointed one, Godʼs chosen. So, in any event, the basic
claim here is simply false. He is called “Jesus Christ” ( Ἰ ησο ῦ  Χριστο ῦ ) in the very10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 5/11

ﬁrst verse of the New Testament (Matthew 1:1) and in the ﬁrst verse of the gospel
sometimes thought to be the ﬁrst-written, Mark (1:1), as well.5
Or if the claim were that Jesus was not understood to be the Messiah or Christ in his
own lifetime before being cruciﬁed, we need not quibble about that (though it is
easy enough to cite the gospel claims that Peter believed him to be the Christ; see,
e.g., Mark 8:29). The book of Acts and the epistles make it abundantly clear that the
Apostles, setting up the earliest churches, thought Jesus was the Messiah—indeed,
the Son of God.
Clearly, Wikipediaʼs claims are tendentious if not false, and represent a point of view
that many if not most Christians would rightly dispute.
It may seem more problematic to speak of the bias of scientiﬁc articles, because
many people do not want to see “unscientiﬁc” views covered in encyclopedia
articles. If such articles are “biased in favor of science,” some people naturally ﬁnd
that to be a feature, not a bug. The problem, though, is that scientists sometimes do
not agree on which theories are and are not scientiﬁc. This point is perfectly
obvious to anyone who actually follows any lively scientiﬁc debate at all closely. On
such issues, the “scientiﬁc point of view” and the “objective point of view” according
to the Establishment might be very much opposed to neutrality. So when certain
people seem uniﬁed on a certain view of a scientiﬁc controversy, then that is the
view that is taken for granted as the Establishment one, and often aggressively
asserted, by Wikipedia.10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 6/11

Neutral informati on, representing a scientiﬁc consensus with no dissent, Iʼm sure.
The global warming and MMR vaccine articles are examples; I hardly need to dive
into these pages, since it is quite enough to say that they endorse deﬁnite positions
that scientiﬁc minorities reject. Another example is how Wikipedia treats various
topics in alternative medicine—often dismissively, and frequently labeled as
“pseudoscience” in Wikipediaʼs own voice. Indeed, Wikipedia deﬁnes the very term
as follows: “Alternative medicine describes any practice that aims to achieve the
healing eﬀects of medicine, but which lacks biological plausibility and is untested,
untestable or proven ineﬀective.” In all these cases, genuine neutrality requires a
diﬀerent sort of treatment.10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 7/11

Again, other examples could be found, in no doubt thousands of other, less exciting
topics. These are just the ﬁrst topics that came to mind, associated as they are with
the culture wars, and their articles on those topics put Wikipedia very decidedly on
one side of that war. You should not be able to say that about an encyclopedia that
claims to be neutral.
It is time for Wikipedia to come clean and admit that it has abandoned NPOV (i.e.,
neutrality as a policy). At the very least they should admit that that they have
redeﬁned the term in a way that makes it utterly incompatible with its original
notion of neutrality, which is the ordinary and common one.6 It might be better to
embrace a “credibility” policy and admit that their notion of what is credible does,
in fact, bias them against conservatism, traditional religiosity, and minority
perspectives on science and medicine—to say nothing of many other topics on
which Wikipedia has biases.
Of course, Wikipedians are unlikely to make any such change; they live in a fantasy
world of their own making.7
The world would be better served by an independent and decentralized
encyclopedia network, such as I proposed with the Encyclosphere. We will certainly
develop such a network, but if it is to remain fully independent of all governmental
and big corporate interests, funds are naturally scarce and it will take time.
Here is a follow-up article (June 2021).
And here is another (June 2023).
1. The misbegotten phrase “neutral point of view” is a Jimmy Wales coinage I never supported. If a
text is neutral with regard to an issue, it lacks any “point of view” with regard to the issue; it
does not take a “neutral point of view.” My preferred phrase was always “the neutrality policy”
or “the nonbias policy.”[↩]
2. On this, see my “Why Neutrality?“, published 2015 by Ballotpedia.[↩]Footnotes10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 8/11

3. Both in the form “Jesus Christ” (e.g., 1 Peter 1:1, Jude 1:1) and in the form “Christ Jesus” (1
Corinthians 1:2). “Christ” is found throughout three epistles widely held to be among the ﬁrst
written, including Galatians and 1 Thessalonians, and twice in James.[↩]
4. I mistakenly conceded this false point in an earlier draft of this article, after not searching
enough. Greek nominative and accusative Χριστόν and genitive Χριστο ῦ  can be found
throughout.[↩]
5. If you look at the footnote Wikipedia cites in support of its weird claim, you will ﬁnd a sensible,
not-misleading, and relatively neutral article by Britannica, the context of which makes it
perfectly clear that the authors were not making any claim about the use of the title “Christ” but
instead the two-word co mbination “Jesus Christ,” as applied directly to Jesus in his own lifetime.
It seems likely that that two-word name was used rarely, but this has nothing whatsoever to do
with his having the title “Christ,” but a reﬂection of the fact that “Ancient Jews usually had only
one name, and, when greater speciﬁcity was needed, it was customary to add the fatherʼs name
or the place of origin.” Wikipedians copying from Britannica may have missed that bit.[↩]
6. That it was Wikipediaʼs original notion, see the Nupedia “Lack of Bias” policy, which was the
source of Wikipediaʼs policy, and see also my ﬁnal (2001) version of the Wikipedia neutrality
policy. Read my “Why Neutrality?” for a lengthy discussion of this notion. Both articles appear
in slightly revised and footnoted versions in my recent book.[↩]
7. UPDATE: In an earlier version of this blog post, I included some screenshots of Wikipedia Alexa
rankings, showing a drop from 5 to 12 or 13. While this is perfectly accurate, the traﬃc to the
site has been more or less ﬂat for years, until the last few months, in which traﬃc spiked
probably because of the Covid-19 virus. But since the drop in Alexa rankings do not seem to
reﬂect a drop in traﬃc, I decided to remove the screenshots and a couple accompanying
sentences.[↩]
byLarry Sanger
“Internet Knowledge Organizer.” Currently President of the Knowledge
Standards Foundation, started Wikipedia and various other educational and
reference sites. Ph.D., Philosophy, Ohio State, 2000. [read mor e]
PostedMay 14, 2020inWikipedia, Knowledge, Internet
Comments
Please do dive in (politely). I want your reactions!10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 9/11

311 responses to “Wikipedia Is Badly Biased”
Dennis Ballinger
September 15, 2025
It is a shame that wikipedia has become biased. You do see it in many ﬁelds as with
covid there were many dr.ʼs, researchers and people that believed covid was not as
bad as mad out to be by the liberals. George Floyʼs death was not murder. Now the
cop did many things wrong as all the other police did during that incident. Murder
was not one. But even the title had murder. Now the court did say ﬂoyd was
murdered but there was much controversy around that and this controversy was
never pointed out.
Look at much social media and the crap that gets posted, no cites just what I believe.
That “I believe” does not make it right or correct. I wish you idea about a governing
body that checks to see if something is biased but again that body could be
corrupted just like wikipedia has been.
This is an interesting issue. People will not solve it as we are. Ainʼt happening.
Reply to comment
Pingback: Oversight Committee to Investigate Alleged Anti-Israel, Pro-Kremlin
Information Manipulation by Wikipedia
August 29, 2025
[…] for leftist public ﬁgures and their pet causes. One of the siteʼs co-founders, Larry
Sanger, spoke out in 2020 about Wikipediaʼs extensive left-wing bias, which he
suggested started around […]
Older Comments 1…20 21 22
Leave a Reply
Your email address will not be published.Required ﬁelds are marked *←10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 10/11

Comment *
Name *
Email *
Website
POST COMMENT
Log in
LarrySanger.org Search...I am human
Privacy - Terms10/27/25, 9:09 PM Wikipedia Is Badly Biased – LarrySanger.org
https://larrysanger.org/2020/05/wikipedia-is-badly-biased/ 11/11